                         __      _ _ ___ _               
                        / _|__ _(_) |_  ) |__  __ _ _ _  
                       |  _/ _` | | |/ /| '_ \/ _` | ' \ 
                       |_| \__,_|_|_/___|_.__/\__,_|_||_|

================================================================================
Fail2Ban (version 0.8.8)                                              2012/07/31
================================================================================

Fail2Ban scans log files like /var/log/pwdfail and bans IP that makes too many
password failures. It updates firewall rules to reject the IP address. These
rules can be defined by the user. Fail2Ban can read multiple log files such as
sshd or Apache web server ones.

This README is a quick introduction to Fail2ban. More documentation, FAQ, HOWTOs
are available on the project website: http://www.fail2ban.org

Installation:
-------------

Required:
   >=python-2.3 (http://www.python.org)

Optional:
   pyinotify:
      >=linux-2.6.13
      >=python-2.4
      >=pyinotify-0.8.3 (https://github.com/seb-m/pyinotify)
   Gamin:
      >=gamin-0.0.21 (http://www.gnome.org/~veillard/gamin)

To install, just do:

> tar xvfj fail2ban-0.8.8.tar.bz2
> cd fail2ban-0.8.8
> python setup.py install

This will install Fail2Ban into /usr/share/fail2ban. The executable scripts are
placed into /usr/bin.

It is possible that Fail2ban is already packaged for your distribution. In this
case, you should use it.

Fail2Ban should be correctly installed now. Just type:

> fail2ban-client -h

to see if everything is alright. You should always use fail2ban-client and never
call fail2ban-server directly.

Configuration:
--------------

You can configure Fail2ban using the files in /etc/fail2ban. It is possible to
configure the server using commands sent to it by fail2ban-client. The available
commands are described in the man page of fail2ban-client. Please refer to it or
to the website: http://www.fail2ban.org

Contact:
--------

Website: http://www.fail2ban.org

You need some new features, you found bugs: visit
https://github.com/fail2ban/fail2ban/issues
and if your issue is not yet known -- file a bug report.

If you would like to troubleshoot or discuss: join the mailing list
https://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/fail2ban-users

If you just appreciate this program: send kudos to the original author
(Cyril Jaquier: <cyril.jaquier@fail2ban.org>) or the mailing list
https://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/fail2ban-users


Thanks:
-------

See THANKS file.

License:
--------

Fail2Ban is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the
terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later
version.

Fail2Ban is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY
WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with
Fail2Ban; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin
Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110, USA
